TITLE 1: Title 38—Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief--Volume 1
CHAPTER I: CHAPTER I—DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
PART 14: PART 14—LEGAL SERVICES, GENERAL COUNSEL, AND MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS
SECTION: § 14.636 Payment of fees for representation by agents and attorneys in proceedings before Agencies of Original Jurisdiction and before the Board of Veterans' Appeals.
NODE: 38:1.0.1.1.16.0.165.37

============================================================

(a) Applicability of rule. The provisions of this section apply to the services of accredited agents and attorneys with respect to benefits under laws administered by VA in all proceedings before the agency of original jurisdiction or before the Board of Veterans' Appeals regardless of whether an appeal has been initiated.

(b) Who may charge fees for representation. Only accredited agents and attorneys may receive fees from claimants or appellants for their services provided in connection with representation. Recognized organizations (including their accredited representatives when acting as such) and individuals recognized under § 14.630 of this part are not permitted to receive fees. An agent or attorney who may also be an accredited representative of a recognized organization may not receive such fees unless he or she has been properly designated as an agent or attorney in accordance with § 14.631 of this part in his or her individual capacity as an accredited agent or attorney.

(c) Circumstances under which fees may be charged. Except as noted in paragraph (d) of this section, agents and attorneys may only charge fees as follows:

(1)(i) Agents and attorneys may charge claimants or appellants for representation provided after an agency of original jurisdiction has issued notice of an initial decision on the claim or claims if the notice of the initial decision was issued on or after the effective date of the modernized review system as provided in § 19.2(a) of this chapter, and the agent or attorney has complied with the power of attorney requirements in § 14.631 and the fee agreement requirements in paragraph (g) of this section. For purposes of this paragraph (c)(1)(i), an initial decision on a claim would include an initial decision on an initial claim for an increase in rate of benefit, an initial decision on a request to revise a prior decision based on clear and unmistakable error (unless fees are permitted at an earlier point pursuant to paragraph (c)(1)(ii) or paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section), and an initial decision on a supplemental claim that was presented after the final adjudication of an earlier claim. However, a supplemental claim will be considered part of the earlier claim if the claimant has continuously pursued the earlier claim by filing any of the following, either alone or in succession: A request for higher-level review, on or before one year after the date on which the agency of original jurisdiction issued a decision; a supplemental claim, on or before one year after the date on which the agency of original jurisdiction issued a decision; a Notice of Disagreement, on or before one year after the date on which the agency of original jurisdiction issued a decision; a supplemental claim, on or before one year after the date on which the Board of Veterans' Appeals issued a decision; or a supplemental claim, on or before one year after the date on which the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims issued a decision.

(ii) Agents and attorneys may charge fees for representation provided with respect to a request for revision of a decision of an agency of original jurisdiction under 38 U.S.C. 5109A or the Board of Veterans' Appeals under 38 U.S.C. 7111 based on clear and unmistakable error if notice of the challenged decision on a claim or claims was issued on or after the effective date of the modernized review system as provided in § 19.2(a), and the agent or attorney has complied with the power of attorney requirements in § 14.631 and the fee agreement requirements in paragraph (g) of this section.

(2)(i) Agents and attorneys may charge claimants or appellants for representation provided: After an agency of original jurisdiction has issued a decision on a claim or claims, including any claim to reopen under 38 CFR 3.156(a) or for an increase in rate of a benefit; the agency of original jurisdiction issued notice of that decision before the effective date of the modernized review system as provided in § 19.2(a) of this chapter; a Notice of Disagreement has been filed with respect to that decision on or after June 20, 2007; and the agent or attorney has complied with the power of attorney requirements in § 14.631 and the fee agreement requirements in paragraph (g) of this section.

(ii) Agents and attorneys may charge fees for representation provided with respect to a request for revision of a decision of an agency of original jurisdiction under 38 U.S.C. 5109A or the Board of Veterans' Appeals under 38 U.S.C. 7111 based on clear and unmistakable error if notice of the challenged decision was issued before the effective date of the modernized review system as provided in § 19.2(a); a Notice of Disagreement was filed with respect to the challenged decision on or after June 20, 2007; and the agent or attorney has complied with the power of attorney requirements in § 14.631 and the fee agreement requirements in paragraph (g) of this section.

(3) In cases in which a Notice of Disagreement was filed on or before June 19, 2007, agents and attorneys may charge fees only for services provided after both of the following conditions have been met:

(i) A final decision was promulgated by the Board with respect to the issue, or issues, involved in the appeal; and

(ii) The agent or attorney was retained not later than 1 year following the date that the decision by the Board was promulgated. (This condition will be considered to have been met with respect to all successor agents or attorneys acting in the continuous prosecution of the same matter if a predecessor was retained within the required time period.)

(d) Exceptions—(1) Chapter 37 loans. With respect to services of agents and attorneys provided after October 9, 1992, a reasonable fee may be charged or paid in connection with any proceeding in a case arising out of a loan made, guaranteed, or insured under chapter 37, United States Code, even though the conditions set forth in paragraph (c) of this section are not met.

(2) Payment of fee by disinterested third party. (i) An agent or attorney may receive a fee or salary from an organization, governmental entity, or other disinterested third party for representation of a claimant or appellant even though the conditions set forth in paragraph (c) of this section have not been met. An organization, governmental entity, or other third party is considered disinterested only if the entity or individual does not stand to benefit financially from the successful outcome of the claim. In no such case may the attorney or agent charge a fee which is contingent, in whole or in part, on whether the matter is resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant.

(ii) For purposes of this part, a person shall be presumed not to be disinterested if that person is the spouse, child, or parent of the claimant or appellant, or if that person resides with the claimant or appellant. This presumption may be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence that the person in question has no financial interest in the success of the claim.

(iii) The provisions of paragraph (g) of this section (relating to fee agreements) shall apply to all payments or agreements to pay involving disinterested third parties. In addition, the agreement shall include or be accompanied by the following statement, signed by the attorney or agent: “I certify that no agreement, oral or otherwise, exists under which the claimant or appellant will provide anything of value to the third-party payer in this case in return for payment of my fee or salary, including, but not limited to, reimbursement of any fees paid.”

(e) Fee reasonableness factors. Fees set forth in a fee agreement, charged, or received for the services of an agent or attorney admitted to practice before VA must be reasonable. They may be based on a fixed fee, hourly rate, a percentage of benefits recovered, or a combination of such bases. Factors considered in determining whether fees are reasonable include:

(1) The extent and type of services the agent or attorney performed;

(2) The complexity of the case;

(3) The level of skill and competence required of the agent or attorney in giving the services;

(4) The amount of time the agent or attorney spent on the case;

(5) The results the agent or attorney achieved, including the amount of any benefits recovered;

(6) The level of review to which the claim was taken and the level of the review at which the agent or attorney was retained;

(7) Rates charged by other agents or attorneys for similar services;

(8) Whether, and to what extent, the payment of fees is contingent upon the results achieved;

(9) If applicable, the reasons why an agent or attorney was discharged or withdrew from representation before the date of the decision awarding benefits; and

(10) If applicable, the fee entitlement of another agent or attorney in the case.

(f) Presumptions and discharge. (1) Fees which do not exceed 20 percent of any past-due benefits awarded as defined in paragraph (h)(3) of this section shall be presumed to be reasonable if the agent or attorney provided representation that continued through the date of the decision awarding benefits. Fees which exceed 33 1/3 percent of any past-due benefits awarded shall be presumed to be unreasonable. These presumptions may be rebutted through an examination of the factors in paragraph (e) of this section establishing that there is clear and convincing evidence that a fee which does not exceed 20 percent of any past-due benefits awarded is not reasonable or that a fee which exceeds 33 1/3 percent is reasonable in a specific circumstance.

(2) With regard to a fee agreement in which the amount of the fee is contingent on the claimant receiving an award of benefits, a reasonable fee for an agent or attorney who is discharged by the claimant or withdraws from representation before the date of the decision awarding benefits is one that fairly and accurately reflects his or her contribution to and responsibility for the benefits awarded. The amount of the fee is informed by an examination of the factors in paragraph (e) of this section.

(g) Fee agreements. All agreements for the payment of fees for services of agents and attorneys (including agreements involving fees or salary paid by an organization, governmental entity or other disinterested third party) must be in writing and signed by both the claimant or appellant and the agent or attorney.

(1) To be valid, a fee agreement must include the following:

(i) The name of the veteran,

(ii) The name of the claimant or appellant if other than the veteran,

(iii) The name of any disinterested third-party payer (see paragraph (d)(2) of this section) and the relationship between the third-party payer and the veteran, claimant, or appellant,

(iv) The applicable VA file number, and

(v) The specific terms under which the amount to be paid for the services of the attorney or agent will be determined.

(2) Fee agreements must also clearly specify if VA is to pay the agent or attorney directly out of past due benefits. A direct-pay fee agreement is a fee agreement between the claimant or appellant and an agent or attorney providing for payment of fees out of past-due benefits awarded directly to an agent or attorney. A fee agreement that does not clearly specify that VA is to pay the agent or attorney out of past-due benefits or that specifies a fee greater than 20 percent of past-due benefits awarded by VA shall be considered to be an agreement in which the agent or attorney is responsible for collecting any fees for representation from the claimant without assistance from VA.

(3) A copy of a direct-pay fee agreement, as defined in paragraph (g)(2) of this section, must be filed with the agency of original jurisdiction within 30 days of its execution. A copy of any fee agreement that is not a direct-pay fee agreement must be filed with the Office of the General Counsel within 30 days of its execution by mailing the copy to the following address: Office of the General Counsel (022D), Department of Veterans Affairs, 810 Vermont Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20420. Only fee agreements that do not provide for the direct payment of fees, documents related to review of fees under paragraph (i) of this section, and documents related to review of expenses under § 14.637, may be filed with the Office of the General Counsel. All documents relating to the adjudication of a claim for VA benefits, including any correspondence, evidence, or argument, must be filed with the agency of original jurisdiction, Board of Veterans' Appeals, or other VA office as appropriate. VA may accept fee agreements that were not filed within 30 days of execution upon a showing of sufficient cause.

(h) Payment of fees by Department of Veterans Affairs directly to an agent or attorney from past-due benefits. (1) Subject to the requirements of the other paragraphs of this section, including paragraphs (c) and (e), the claimant or appellant and an agent or attorney may enter into a fee agreement providing that payment for the services of the agent or attorney will be made directly to the agent or attorney by VA out of any past-due benefits awarded in any proceeding before VA or the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims. VA will charge and collect an assessment out of the fees paid directly to agents or attorneys from past-due benefits awarded. The amount of such assessment shall be equal to five percent of the amount of the fee required to be paid to the agent or attorney, but in no event shall the assessment exceed $100. Such an agreement will be honored by VA only if the following conditions are met:

(i) The total fee payable (excluding expenses) does not exceed 20 percent of the total amount of the past-due benefits awarded,

(ii) The amount of the fee is contingent on whether or not the claim is resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant,

(iii) The agent or attorney is accredited (see §§ 14.627(a) and 14.629(b)) on the date of VA's fee allocation notice (see paragraph (i) of this section), and

(iv) The award of past-due benefits results in a cash payment to a claimant or an appellant from which the fee may be deducted. (An award of past-due benefits will not always result in a cash payment to a claimant or an appellant. For example, no cash payment will be made to military retirees unless there is a corresponding waiver of retirement pay. (See 38 U.S.C. 5304(a) and 38 CFR 3.750))

(2) For purposes of this paragraph (h), a claim will be considered to have been resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant if all or any part of the relief sought is granted.

(3) For purposes of this paragraph (h), “past-due benefits” means a nonrecurring payment resulting from a benefit, or benefits, granted on appeal or awarded on the basis of a claim readjudicated after a denial by a VA agency of original jurisdiction or the Board of Veterans' Appeals or the lump sum payment that represents the total amount of recurring cash payments that accrued between the effective date of the award, as determined by applicable laws and regulations, and the date of the grant of the benefit by the agency of original jurisdiction, the Board of Veterans' Appeals, or an appellate court.

(i) When the benefit granted on appeal, or as the result of the readjudicated claim, is service connection for a disability, the “past-due benefits” will be based on the initial disability rating assigned by the agency of original jurisdiction following the award of service connection. The sum will equal the payments accruing from the effective date of the award to the date of the initial disability rating decision. If an increased evaluation is subsequently granted as the result of an appeal of the disability evaluation initially assigned by the agency of original jurisdiction, and if the agent or attorney represents the claimant or appellant in that phase of the claim, the agent or attorney will be paid a supplemental payment based upon the increase granted on appeal, to the extent that the increased amount of disability is found to have existed between the initial effective date of the award following the grant of service connection and the date of the rating action implementing the appellate decision granting the increase.

(ii) Unless otherwise provided in the fee agreement between the claimant or appellant and the agent or attorney, the agent's or attorney's fees will be determined on the basis of the total amount of the past-due benefits even though a portion of those benefits may have been apportioned to the claimant's or appellant's dependents.

(iii) If an award is made as the result of favorable action with respect to several issues, the past-due benefits will be calculated only on the basis of that portion of the award which results from action taken on issues concerning which the criteria in paragraph (c) of this section have been met.

(4) As required by paragraph (g)(3) of this section, the agent or attorney must file with the agency of original jurisdiction within 30 days of the date of execution a copy of the agreement providing for the direct payment of fees out of any benefits subsequently determined to be past due.

(i) Fee review. For purposes of this paragraph (i), “party” means the claimant or appellant or any agent or attorney who represented the claimant or appellant in the case; “eligible for direct payment” means eligible for direct payment of a fee under the requirements of paragraphs (c), (g), and (h) of this section; “continuous agent or attorney” means the agent or attorney who provided representation that continued through the date of the decision awarding benefits; and “timely filed” means within 60 days of the fee allocation notice.

(1) When one or more direct-pay fee agreements has been filed in accordance with paragraph (g) of this section and a decision awards past-due benefits in a case, the agency of original jurisdiction that issued the decision shall issue to the parties a fee allocation notice. The fee allocation notice shall decide whether the agents or attorneys who filed direct-pay fee agreements in the case are eligible for direct payment, and shall provide one of two default fee allocations:

(i) In cases where a continuous agent or attorney is eligible for direct payment, the default shall be allocation of the fee to the continuous agent or attorney.

(ii) In cases where paragraph (i)(1)(i) of this section does not apply, the default shall be an equal split of the fee based on the number of agents or attorneys who are eligible for direct payment plus the claimant or appellant.

(2) A party that disagrees with the default fee allocation in a given case may file a request for Office of the General Counsel fee review, as provided in paragraph (i)(3) of this section. A party that disagrees with a direct payment eligibility determination may only appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals. Absent a timely filed request for Office of the General Counsel fee review or a timely filed appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals, the default fee allocation described in paragraphs (i)(1)(i) and (ii) of this section is final and VA may release the fee.

(3) A request for Office of the General Counsel fee review under this paragraph (i) must be filed electronically in accordance with the instructions on the Office of the General Counsel's website, or at the following address: Office of the General Counsel (022D), 810 Vermont Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20420. The request must include the names of the veteran and all parties, the applicable VA file number, and the date of the decision awarding benefits. The request must set forth the requestor's proposal as to reasonable fee allocation, and the reasons therefor, and must be accompanied by all argument and evidence the requestor desires to submit.

(4) Upon the receipt of a timely filed request under paragraph (i)(3) of this section, or upon his or her own initiative, the Deputy Chief Counsel with subject-matter jurisdiction will initiate the Office of the General Counsel's motion for a fee review by sending notice to the parties. Not later than 30 days from the date of the motion, any party may file a response, with all argument and evidence the party desires to submit, electronically in accordance with the instructions on the Office of the General Counsel's website, or at the following address: Office of the General Counsel (022D), 810 Vermont Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20420. Such responses must be served on all other parties. The Deputy Chief Counsel with subject-matter jurisdiction may, for a reasonable period upon a showing of sufficient cause, extend the time for any party's response.

(5) The General Counsel or his or her designee shall render the Office of the General Counsel's decision on the matter. The decision will be premised on the reasonableness factors of paragraph (e) of this section, the standards of paragraph (f) of this section, the limitation on direct payment of paragraph (h)(1)(i) of this section, the claims file, the parties' submissions, and all relevant factors. The decision may address the issue of fee eligibility if no other agency of original jurisdiction has made a determination on that issue.

(6) The Office of the General Counsel's decision is a final adjudicative action that may only be appealed to the Board of Veterans' Appeals. Unless a party files a Notice of Disagreement with the Office of the General Counsel's decision, the parties must allocate any excess payment in accordance with the decision not later than the expiration of the time within which the Office of the General Counsel's decision may be appealed to the Board of Veterans' Appeals.

(j) Failure to comply. In addition to whatever other penalties may be prescribed by law or regulation, failure to comply with the requirements of this section may result in proceedings under § 14.633 to terminate the agent's or attorney's accreditation to practice before VA.

(k) Appeals. Except as otherwise provided in this section, appeals shall be initiated and processed using the procedures in 38 CFR part 20 applicable to appeals under the modernized system.

[Section Authority: (Authority: 38 U.S.C. 5902, 5904, 5905)]

(The Office of Management and Budget has approved the information collection requirements in this section under control number 2900-0605)

[Citation: [73 FR 29875, May 22, 2008, as amended at 80 FR 81193, Dec. 29, 2015; 82 FR 26754, June 9, 2017; 84 FR 175, Jan. 18, 2019; 89 FR 85063, Oct. 25, 2024]]

[Part Authority: Authority:5 U.S.C. 301; 28 U.S.C. 2671-2680; 38 U.S.C. 501(a), 512, 515, 5502, 5901-5905; 28 CFR part 14, appendix to part 14, unless otherwise noted.]

[Part Source: Source:19 FR 5552, Aug. 31, 1954, unless otherwise noted.]
