TITLE 1: Title 38—Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief--Volume 1
CHAPTER I: CHAPTER I—DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
PART 3: PART 3—ADJUDICATION
SUBPART A: Subpart A—Pension, Compensation, and Dependency and Indemnity Compensation
SECTION: § 3.665 Incarcerated beneficiaries and fugitive felons—compensation.
NODE: 38:1.0.1.1.4.1.73.217

============================================================

(a) General. Any person specified in paragraph (c) of this section who is incarcerated in a Federal, State or local penal institution in excess of 60 days for conviction of a felony will not be paid compensation or dependency and indemnity compensation (DIC) in excess of the amount specified in paragraph (d) of this section beginning on the 61st day of incarceration. VA will inform a person whose benefits are subject to this reduction of the rights of the person's dependents to an apportionment while the person is incarcerated, and the conditions under which payments to the person may be resumed upon release from incarceration. In addition, VA will also notify the person's dependents of their right to an apportionment if the VA is aware of their existence and can obtain their addresses. However, no apportionment will be made if the veteran or the dependent is a fugitive felon as defined in paragraph (n) of this section.

(b) Definitions. For the purposes of this section the term compensation includes disability compensation under 38 U.S.C. 1151. The term dependency and indemnity compensation (DIC) includes death compensation payable under 38 U.S.C. 1121 or 1141, death compensation and DIC payable under 38 U.S.C. 1151, and any benefit payable under chapter 13 of title 38, United States Code. The term release from incarceration includes participation in a work release or halfway house program, parole, and completion of sentence. For purposes of this section, a felony is any offense punishable by death or imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year, unless specifically categorized as a misdemeanor under the law of the prosecuting jurisdiction.

(c) Applicability. The provisions of paragraph (a) of this section are applicable to the following persons:

(1) A person serving a period of incarceration for conviction of a felony committed after October 7, 1980.

(2) A person serving a period of incarceration after September 30, 1980 (regardless of when the felony was committed) when the following conditions are met:

(i) The person was incarcerated on October 1, 1980; and

(ii) An award of compensation or DIC is approved after September 30, 1980.

(3) A veteran who, on October 7, 1980, was incarcerated in a Federal, State, or local penal institution for a felony committed before that date, and who remains so incarcerated for a conviction of that felony as of December 27, 2001.

(d) Amount payable during incarceration—(1) Veteran rated 20 percent or more. A veteran to whom the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section apply with a service-connected disability evaluation of 20 percent or more shall receive the rate of compensation payable under 38 U.S.C. 1114(a).

(2) Veteran rated less than 20 percent. A veteran to whom the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section apply with a service-connected disability evaluation of less than 20 percent (even though the rate for 38 U.S.C. 1114 (k) or (q) is paid) shall receive one-half the rate of compensation payable under 38 U.S.C. 1114(a).

(3) Surviving spouse, parent or child. A surviving spouse, parent, or child, beneficiary to whom the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section apply shall receive one-half the rate of compensation payable under 38 U.S.C. 1114(a).

(e) Apportionment—(1) Compensation. All of the compensation not paid to an incarcerated veteran may be apportioned to the veteran's spouse, child or children (in equal shares), or dependent parent or parents (in equal shares).

(2) DIC. All of the DIC not paid to an incarcerated surviving spouse or other children not in the surviving spouse's custody may be apportioned to another child or children. All of the DIC not paid to an incarcerated child may be apportioned to the surviving spouse or other children (in equal shares).

(f) Effective dates. An apportionment under this section shall be effective the date of reduction of payments made to the incarcerated person, subject to payments to the incarcerated person over the same period, if a claim or intent to file a claim as set forth in § 3.155(b) is received within 1 year after notice to the incarcerated person as required by paragraph (a) of this section, and any necessary evidence is received within 1 year from the date of request by the Department of Veterans Affairs; otherwise, payments may not be made for any period prior to the date of receipt of a new claim or intent to file a claim as set forth in § 3.155(b).

(g) Incarcerated dependent. No apportionment may be made to or on behalf of any person who is incarcerated in a Federal, State, or local penal institution for conviction of a felony.

(h) Notice to dependent for whom apportionment granted. A dependent for whom an apportionment is granted under this section shall be informed that the apportionment is subject to immediate discontinuance upon the incarcerated person's release or participation in a work release or halfway house program.

(i) Resumption upon release—(1) No apportionment. If there was no apportionment at the time of release from incarceration, the released person's award shall be resumed the date of release from incarceration if the Department of Veterans Affairs receives notice of release within 1 year following release; otherwise, the award shall be resumed the date of receipt of notice of release. If there was an apportionment award during incarceration, it shall be discontinued the date of last payment to the apportionee upon receipt of notice of release of the incarcerated person. Payment to the released person shall then be resumed at the full rate from date of last payment to the apportionee. Payment to the released person from date of release to date of last payment to the apportionee shall be made at the rate which is the difference between the released person's full rate and the sum of:

(i) The rate that was payable to the apportionee; and

(ii) The rate payable during incarceration.

(2) Apportionment to a dependent parent. An apportionment made to a dependent parent under this section cannot be continued beyond the veteran's release from incarceration unless the veteran is incompetent and the provisions of § 3.452(b)(1) are for application. When a competent veteran is released from incarceration, an apportionment made to a dependent parent shall be discontinued and the veteran's award resumed as provided in paragraph (i)(1) of this section.

(j) Increased compensation during incarceration—(1) General. The amount of any increased compensation awarded to an incarcerated veteran that results from other than a statutory rate increase may be subject to reduction due to incarceration. This applies to a veteran whose compensation is subject to reduction under paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section prior to approval of an award of increased compensation as well as to veteran whose compensation is not subject to reduction under paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section prior to approval of an award of increased compensation.

(2) Veteran subject to reduction under paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section. If prior to approval of an award of increased compensation the veteran's compensation was reduced under the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section, the amount of the increase shall be reduced as follows if the veteran remains incarcerated:

(i) If the veteran's schedular evaluation is increased from 10 percent to 20 percent or greater, the amount payable to the veteran shall be increased from one-half the rate payable under 38 U.S.C. 1114(a) to the rate payable under section 1114(a).

(ii) If the veteran's schedular evaluation was 20 percent or more, none of the increased compensation shall be paid to the veteran while the veteran remains incarcerated.

(3) Veteran's compensation not subject to reduction under paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section prior to award of increased compensation. If prior to the approval of an award of increased compensation the veteran is incarcerated in a Federal, State, or local penal institution for conviction of a felony and the veteran's compensation was not reduced under the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section, none of the increased compensation shall be paid to the veteran for periods after October 7, 1980, subject to the following conditions:

(i) The veteran remains incarcerated after October 7, 1980 in a Federal, State, or local penal institution for conviction of a felony; and

(ii) The award of increased compensation is approved after October 7, 1980. If the effective date of the increase is prior to October 8, 1980, the amount payable for periods prior to October 8, 1980, shall not be reduced.

(4) Apportionments. The amount of any increased compensation reduced under this paragraph may be apportioned as provided in paragraph (e) of this section.

(k) Retroactive awards. Whenever compensation or DIC is awarded to an incarcerated person any amounts due for periods prior to date of reduction under this section shall be paid to the incarcerated person.

(l) DIC parents. If two parents are both entitled to DIC and were living together prior to the time of the DIC payable to one parent was reduced due to incarceration, they shall be considered as two parents not living together for the purpose of determining entitlement to DIC.

(m) Conviction overturned on appeal. If a conviction is overturned on appeal, any compensation or DIC withheld under this section as a result of incarceration for such conviction (less the amount of any apportionment) shall be restored to the beneficiary.

(n) Fugitive felons. (1) Compensation is not payable on behalf of a veteran for any period during which he or she is a fugitive felon. Compensation or DIC is not payable on behalf of a dependent of a veteran for any period during which the veteran or the dependent is a fugitive felon.

(2) For purposes of this section, the term fugitive felon means a person who is a fugitive by reason of:

(i) Fleeing to avoid prosecution, or custody or confinement after conviction, for an offense, or an attempt to commit an offense, which is a felony under the laws of the place from which the person flees; or

(ii) Violating a condition of probation or parole imposed for commission of a felony under Federal or State law.

(3) For purposes of paragraph (n) of this section, the term felony includes a high misdemeanor under the laws of a State which characterizes as high misdemeanors offenses that would be felony offenses under Federal law.

(4) For purposes of paragraph (n) of this section, the term dependent means a spouse, surviving spouse, child, or dependent parent of a veteran.

[Section Authority: (Authority: 38 U.S.C. 501(a), 5313, 5313B; Sec. 506, Pub. L. 107-103, 115 Stat. 996-997)]

[Citation: [46 FR 47542, Sept. 29, 1981, as amended at 68 FR 34542, June 10, 2003; 79 FR 57697, Sept. 25, 2014; 91 FR 906, Jan. 9, 2026]]
